Braju?
Braju? Braju!
Coming, madam.
- Are you deaf?
It's past 4:00.
Take tea to the office.
Bankim, Bankim...
Did I tell you I got a
letter from Umapada?
No.
Didn't he write to you?
When does my brother ever write me?
He hasn't been doing
too well in law.
He asked if there was something
here he could...
I'd been thinking myself
that if I'd a manager...
In money matters I am not exactly...
Could he handle it?
Why not?
It's not hard, and I'd be there.
He's never been able to put
his mind to anything.
He will.
I've already asked him to come.
Until a man's given responsibility,
how do we know...
Shall I serve you some more?
- No.
You hardly eat anything.
That's why I can work so much,
Charu.
Otherwise the newspaper wouldn't...
Tell me.
Am I lazy? Good-for-nothing?
Who said that?
The British have a phrase,
"The idle rich".
I intend to prove them wrong.
Just having money doesn't
mean you're lazy.
You don't have any regrets, do you?
Why?
I spend so much money on the paper.
Just the other day...
I bought a new printing press.
What of it?
You are doing such good things...
And making a name for yourself.
After all,
we aren't about to starve.
You know,
when I hear Suren Banerjee speak...
Someday I'll explain this business
of politics to you.
All right?
Intellectual power may be good...
in its own way.
But it's not intellectual
eminence...
that constitutes individual
or national greatness.
It is energy, patriotism...
devotion to duty...
the capacity for self-sacrifice...
an unflinching regard for truth.
It is these...
Just two more minutes, Charu.
I know it's very late in the night.
I didn't come to hurry you.
Here.
Did you made this?
Next time I'll embroider
you some slippers.
When do you find the time?
It's not like I lack for time.
Charu.
You're very lonely, aren't you?
Oh, I am used to it now.
Loneliness isn't something
to get used to, Charu.
Have you read Swarnalata?
- What?
Swarnalata.
Why do you laugh?
Charu.
I have my Charulata.
I need nothing else.
Plays, novels, poetry...
I don't need such things,
understand?
I tell you what...
I will write to your brother...
and ask him to bring his wife along.
All right?
Then you will have company.
Clubs.
Hearts.
Diamonds.
Diamonds?
Diamonds!
Another round. Here we go.
Hearts.
Diamonds.
Spades.
Come on, play.
Ice-cream?
Forget the ice-cream. Play.
Spades!
Another round.
I told you, you couldn't beat me.
This game is all luck and no brains.
It takes determination.
I'm always telling my husband,
You've no determination.
That's why you never...
- Clubs.
Clubs.
Spades.
Hearts.
Diamonds.
Clubs.
Hearts.
Come on, clubs.
Darn it! Spades!
Come on, hearts.
Oh, no!
Just three cards left.
Come on.
There's determination for you!
It must be past 4:00.
Would you ask Braju
to take the tea in?
Braju.
Oh, you!
- All right, I will go.
But your servant's deaf.
He never answers the first time.
Braju, take tea to the office.
Sister-in-law!
A storm's coming up!
Get everything in, quick!
Hail Krishna! Slayer of demons!
Are you reading Amanda Math?
Were you due today?
- Where's my cousin?
In the office.
- Paper still going strong?
Hail Krishna!
What's going on?
- Look at all this.
Good heavens!
It's you! How come you are here?
I'd have been here earlier
but for Mother.
How is your mother?
- Fine. Whose tea is that?
Go on, have it.
Did you get them all?
Tell Braju to bring one more tea.
Well?
Tell me, what are your plans?
To live off you.
- That's my plan.
What's yours?
- Mine?
To relax...
Pursue my writing, and...
And what?
And relax some more.
That won't do, brother.
Enough of relaxing.
You will have to work.
- Work?
Oh, that cursed word!
I'll slap you one! Come on.
- Where?
Come see my press.
You are here too?
Uma isn't like you.
He works for The Sentinel!
Really?
- Come on. We will be right back.
Just two hours' proofreading a day.
Oh no! I am not good with spellings.
No need for that.
Only political diseases.
Let me see a copy.
24th issue of the Sentinel.
Dated April the 9th. 1879.
Careful! It's still wet.
Very nice name.
- That was Nishikanta's idea.
The motto was mine.
- Truth survives.
But will the paper survive?
You missed the most important thing.
My editorial.
What's this?
Criticizing the government?
Why not?
Why not, Amol?
Why are they carrying on
the Afghan campaign?
Because England's prestige
in Europe is at stake.
But India bears the cost.
Why?
Should we support this?
And what about the Press Act?
Three years now,
and they haven't changed it.
And what about the Civil
Service scheme?
What about the Arms Act?
The salt tax? The rent tax?
The British government is running
the country, fine.
But in this business of
running the country...
the Indians have no say.
Why? There is no representation.
They've left no scope for that.
Am I wrong to condemn it?
What if you are arrested?
- Why?
To be outspoken isn't necessarily
to be disloyal.
Good Lord, sedition!
I am not getting involved!
The storm wreaked havoc...
with the tram today.
Did you get any advertisers?
Just one. Holloway's Pills.
A three-month contract because
I went in person.
Bath Gate, Stan Street none
of the big pharmacists?
You have to lower your rates.
- Why?
Four annas per line is too high.
It's a new paper,
with a few subscribers.
It has no prestige yet.
How can you charge the same rates
as the established papers.
Besides, it's a political paper.
No sizzle, no spice.
How can it survive without all that?
You mean silly satire
and saucy news?
All the scandals of the marketplace?
No, Umapada.
No.
I'd sooner give it all up.
- But I need motivation.
There's no rudder, no mast.
This ship just might sink.
We have a rudder!
I hold that rudder,
and I'm not letting go.
And our mast?
The paper's truth and integrity.
Fine. Then you run the whole thing.
What are you saying?
Even a penniless widow can stand
on her own these days.
And you think we can't
keep a paper going?
But the only way is
the way of honesty.
What you're suggesting
isn't honest.
It's the way of prostitution.
So what am I supposed to do?
Why don't you feel motivated?
Because you haven't been given
enough responsibility, right?
What's this?
The keys.
From now on, you take complete
charge of the money.
And we reduce rates by one anna.
Let's see if we survive that way.
See here, Umapada.
You know what this paper is to me?
Your sister's rival.
But don't let that
slip to Charulata.
"Every bud and every
very blossom..."
"Nods and sways in the
gentle breeze..."
"Rippling,
laughing in wave and billow..."
Will this room do?
Sister-in-law.
You ask if this room will do...
And I wonder if I can take such
luxury after college life.
What luxury?
The hardships of your student
days are over.
You have gotten so skinny.
"The cuckoo roams from
bower to bower..."
"Cuckoo,
cuckoo, cuckoo, she cries..."
You still sing?
"Deep within my heart
is yearning..."
"Alas, alas know not why..."
You will never change!
Sister-in-law.
- What?
I need to do something.
What should I do?
From the way you're going on,
it's very clear.
What?
- Get married.
The female mind always...
She's here too?
- Didn't you see my husband?
So spouses have to travel in pairs?
Of course.
You are hungry, aren't you?
O triangular tidbit...
I shall...
The food is good!
She made them, right?
Why? Couldn't I have?
No.
- Why?
Then Manda wouldn't have
brought me so many.
A woman can't understand
the female mind.
Only a man can.
Fine. Give me your shirt.
What shirt?
The one you have on.
It's got a tear so big four
snacks could fit inside.
And give me any other torn
clothes you have.
At the boarding house we
did these things...
This isn't a boarding house.
"When I leave Lucknow city..."
Cousin, your printing press
is really something.
It's like correcting exams
by the worst in the class!
Thank you, brother.
Is it all right?
- Very good.
"What will be the plight..."
Cousin. Do you get The Lotus?
I get all those magazines,
but they aren't in here.
Have a look in the next room...
where Charulata's usually
roaming about.
You don't care for all that?
Those delights aren't for me.
The gloomy tragedies writers
churn out these days!
Writing off tragedy, are you?
Nishikanta once told me...
that after reading one
of Bankim's novels...
he couldn't sleep for three nights.
I told him, you must be crazy!
A healthy fellow like you
needs seven hours' sleep.
A novel comes along and wreaks
havoc with that...
And you allow it?
Cousin, suppose the government
announces a new tax tomorrow.
Will you still be able to sleep?
Amol...
politics is different.
Politics is a living thing.
Real. Palpable.
When an unfair tax is imposed...
which happens all the time
with Lord Lytton.
We can see with our own eyes...
How the people of this poor
country are affected!
How they suffer!
Which is the greater tragedy?
That or Romeo and Juliet?
The queen will be saved, all right.
But will the Bengali
people be saved?
With all this gloomy literature,
they're going to the dogs.
We must do something about it.
We must be strong Physically.
Merely exercising the
brain won't do.
Absolutely not!
Have you been exercising?
Just feel and see.
How old are you?
- Twenty-three.
I am 35. Come on.
- What?
Elbows on the table. - Arm
wrestling? - Come on. - But I am...
One, two, three.
Bravo. Off to bed now.
Hey.
I've been meaning to talk
to you about something.
You know,
Charu has quite a literary bent.
She's always reading magazines
and such...
anything in Bengali.
The trouble is...
I've no time to give
her any guidance.
But I think she has talent.
She writes well.
When I was in Monghir,
she wrote me letters.
She has a wonderful style.
What talent she has, and how much...
is for you to discover.
Give her some of your time.
Guide her. Get her to write.
If she really has talent,
it mustn't languish.
Understand? Start from tomorrow.
Just one thing She mustn't suspect.
She'd only resist and withdraw
into her shell.
What kind of tax is this?
Instead of writing myself,
I'm to help your wife write.
Do both. You can manage.
I trust you.
Good night.
Oh, my!
How beautiful!
Sister-in-law! Hey!
Stop shouting.
It grates on the ears.
What are you doing
that's so special?
A person can't even think
with all that noise.
No use worrying and fretting
- Oh, my!
What is destined to happen
will happen...
What's this getup?
Sister-in-law,
prepare a betel leaf for me.
No, sir, I will not!
What's this?
- Slippers for the master.
What good fortune my cousin has!
You shall have what he has...
You mean slippers?
A wife.
Where did you go?
To the shop to buy
myself a notebook.
That's what made you so tired?
Sleepy? You want a pillow?
All done with studies, exams...
Professors, cutting classes.
What's left?
Foolishness and mischief?
Poetry.
Rhythm.
You know...
I was thinking...
What?
All of life is like a rhythm.
Birth, death.
Day, night.
Happiness, sorrow.
Meeting, parting.
Like the waves on the ocean...
now rising, now falling.
One complements the other.
Don't you agree?
Will you write all that
in your notebook?
Thank you.
How about a game of cards?
Are the pulse cakes drying?
- Yes.
Shall we play?
Manda, are you a traditional
woman or a modern woman?
If you aren't playing,
I'll put the cards away.
Yesterday the queen of spades
got lost under the pillow.
Listen.
Any woman who spends her time
reclining on her bed...
arranging her hair in the mirror...
embroidering carpets,
reading novels...
concerned only with her
own well-being...
May indeed be somewhat
superior to an animal.
But she has little justification
for being born a woman.
We humbly advise a woman
of this ilk...
to put a rope around her
neck and hang herself.
Are you of that ilk?
Can I embroider carpets
or read novels?
You know I can't.
Then you're a traditional woman?
- I don't know.
Traditional woman, leave this room.
We are about to discuss literature.
Leave.
- No.
Then don't.
"Speak just a few words."
"And a glimpse of your
bright teeth..."
"...will dispel the gloominess
in my heart..."
"Just as your face..."
"Gleaming like the moon..."
"Captivates my partridge-like
eyes..."
Have you read Manmatha Dutta?
- No.
Have you?
- Yes.
Lonesome Melodies?
- Loathsome melodies.
Lonesome melodies!
Yes,
I read it in last month's Lotus.
You don't like Manmatha Dutta?
No taste. This must change.
Then who do you like?
Bankim Babu.
- Bankim Babu?
How original!
How do you expect me to be original?
What do I know?
I simply said what I liked.
Though I do find him difficult
in places...
and I have to use the dictionary.
But my, what descriptions!
His women are so beautiful!
So much perfection isn't right.
They make me feel ugly.
They are all so beautiful.
Mrinalini is beautiful,
Radha Rani is beautiful...
Saibalini is beautiful,
Kapalkundala is beautiful.
And Kundanandini?
She's beautiful too,
but not perfect.
Lutfunnessa is not perfect either.
She is too tall.
And her lips are a bit thin.
And she is dark-skinned.
- Yes.
Look at our traditional woman.
You mention Bankim and
she starts snoring.
Would you get the mat over there?
The mat?
Over here.
The garden is a disaster!
And my cousin said he wanted
a Japanese garden here!
Your cousin thinks of nothing
but his newspaper.
A stream here...
with a few lotuses and some ducks...
and a bridge across it...
and flowers on both sides.
No peacocks to spread their
plumes and dance?
No, no peacocks.
None of their screeching.
It would disturb my work.
But some fawns would be nice.
One could sit here and compose
an entire poetry book.
Brother-in-law.
Give me a push.
Just once. Then I can manage alone.
Modern woman, this is going too far.
What's the harm in a push?
There's a tax on swinging now,
you know.
Brother-in-law.
Mr. Know-it-All!
What are you thinking about?
I am just thinking.
About what?
Writing something.
What will you write?
That's what I am thinking about.
What?
I am thinking.
Good. Keep thinking.
Think and write.
But not in that notebook.
I'll make you one.
Here's an ink and pen.
O my blank notebook!
My imagination hasn't
yet touched you.
The day I shall write my last
line on your last page...
how far off is that day?
Oh my! My notebook is enchanted!
Just one touch and
inspiration flows!
But you must promise one thing.
- What?
Whatever you write stays
in that notebook.
It's not to be published.
All right?
All right.
You forgot a stroke.
Thank you.
Thank you, thank you.
Done.
End of essay and end of notebook.
Now write a story.
Why?
Is there something wrong with this?
Listen.
Prince Abhimanyu,
while still in the womb...
learned only how to penetrate
enemy formations...
but not how to exit it...
So a river, emerging from the
mountain's rocky womb...
can only advance and knows
not how to turn back.
O river! O youth!
O time! O world!
You too can only march onward.
You never turn back
along the path...
strewn with memory's gilded pebbles.
Only the mind of man looks back.
The rest of creation never does.
Well?
Go ahead. I want your opinion.
If it's good,
why, and if it's bad, why.
Say something. Is it bad?
I'm not saying it's bad.
- Well, then?
There's just been so much of that.
River, sky, cloud, moon.
Enough?
What is enough in literature?
And must one only write stories?
Addison, Steele, Emerson.
Did they write stories?
Fine. Write whatever you like.
No, I've written enough.
Your turn now.
- Heaven help us!
Why?
I don't get ideas like yours.
So what? Write something else.
Write about your childhood,
the river near your village...
The religious festivals,
the fairs...
All those things you've
told me about.
Hush!
- Why?
I can't remember.
- Well, try.
If you don't write,
my cousin will want a reason.
A reason?
He'll think I'm not teaching
you anything.
I see. So he told you.
I mean, he didn't exactly...
appoint me as your regular teacher
with a monthly salary.
Now where are you off to?
Time to arrange for tea.
I am going to send in my essay.
Go ahead.
Deep within my heart is yearning...
Alas, alas...
I know not why...
Sister-in-law.
On the roof.
You can see the church
clock from there.
Go and see.
No.
- Then don't.
You want another betel leaf?
- All right.
Manda, what paper should I submit
my essay to? - What?
What paper should I
submit my essay to?
Good Lord! How should I know?
That's why I am asking you.
Those who do know can't
make up their mind.
Answer quickly.
The Lotus or The Philanthrope?
The locust?
- Not locust. Lotus!
Quick, pick one.
The Lotus!
You are right.
The Philanthrope doesn't
publish new writers.
But will they publish me?
- Yes!
Good.
God bless you, dear Manda.
Blessings aren't enough.
If I'm right, you owe me a treat.
Cake from Pelleti's or Sweets
from Bhim Nagar?
Ice-cream.
- What?
Ice-cream!
- So be it.
You could've brought these in!
What if it had rained?
Amol.
- Coming, cousin.
Amol has been writing these days.
Have you read anything
he has written?
Charu?
Why?
I was just wondering if he
has any real talent...
or if he is just wasting his time.
A very good offer of marriage
came for him from Bardhaman.
Raghunath Mitra's daughter.
Good.
Cousin?
- Ah, there you are.
I haven't finished proofing yet.
- Why?
I've been doing some writing myself.
About what?
- Nothing much.
Let me see it.
You're going to read it?
- Yes. Bring it.
Nothing gloomy, I hope.
- No.
Bring it here.
Go on. Run, run, run.
A good bride.
Amol just has to consent.
That's nothing.
He just needs a little coaxing.
I am not sure coaxing...
Will you read it yourself or...
- No, read it to me.
Sit down.
Just a minute.
Go ahead.
Light of a Moonless Night.
When I...
Hold it. What did you say?
Light of a Moonless Night.
- Light of a Moonless Night.
So it's about starlight?
A scientific article?
No, cousin. I study literature.
I can't write an astronomical
treatise.
So there's no moon?
No.
No stars either?
- No.
No night either?
Yes, but not in a literal sense.
And no light, in a literal sense?
Listen,
I think you should get married.
Married?
There's a very good offer
from Bardhaman.
The daughter of a lawyer there,
Mr. Mitra.
A good-looking girl,
and well-educated too.
Just tell me if you are interested.
He's interested, all right.
Plenty interested.
How would you know? You don't
understand me or my writing!
I understand just fine.
- No, you don't.
What's all this squabbling?
I haven't told you the most
important part yet.
After the marriage...
Mr. Mitra intends to send his
new son-in-law to England.
Sit down.
Sit down and let that sink in.
Suppose you came back a barrister
Would that be so bad?
Brother. Give it some thought.
It's nothing to sneeze at.
England!
The land of Shakespeare.
Why just Shakespeare?
Burke, Macaulay, Gladstone!
You could go hear them
speak in Parliament.
Listen to their speeches in person!
I never got there myself.
I regret it to this day.
I got as far as getting
my passport once.
The Isles of Greece.
Exactly!
Why just England?
You'll see the continent.
France. Germany.
Greece. Italy!
The land of Mazzini and Garibaldi...
You will see it with your own eyes.
How many young Bengalis
get such a chance?
Aren't you tempted?
Mediterranean.
What a wonderful word!
Like the strains of the instrument.
Mediterranean.
Just imagine it, Amol.
New Year's Eve.
The last decade of the 19th century.
The clock of Big Ben is striking.
It's snowing.
And you're walking
down the street...
in overcoat and gloves.
The spirited demeanour
and confident strides.
The Young Bengal!
How I wish I were in your place!
Well? Are you ready?
Mr. Amol Chandra Basu?
Brother?
Agreed?
"Rich with thy hurrying streams,
bright with orchard gleams."
"Cool with thy winds of delight."
"Dark fields waving."
Cousin.
- Yes?
No.
- What?
But why?
Long live my Bengal.
Good night!
Hail Krishna!
What do I tell Mr. Mitra?
- Ask for some time.
How long? A week?
A month!
Did you see that?
Why are you laughing?
Didn't I tell you he was interested?
He just won't admit it.
- You don't understand, Charu.
An opportunity like this
won't come again.
Don't worry.
Do as he says and ask for some time.
In a few days he'll
say yes on his own.
You think I don't know your cousin?
Manda.
Yes?
- Come here.
Tell me what you want.
Come here.
"The sky is tilted with the
luster of the moon..."
Come here.
A smile adorns it...
What?
Come close.
- I am close.
Closer.
Look at me.
- I am looking.
What?
You haven't been up to anything,
have you?
What if I have?
You drink on the sly, don't you?
My Mandakini.
A good girl...
with a bad husband.
What's all this about?
You don't think I am rotten?
Why should I think that?
Then who is?
It's our luck that's rotten,
having to leave our own home.
Why?
Don't you like it here?
How could I? And besides...
Besides what?
No, nothing.
Just two months more.
Two months?
Just put up with it two more months.
And then?
Then what?
What are you planning?
Could you lie for my sake?
Tell me how much you love me.
Dear God! What kind of lie?
All right. I will make it easy.
I'll do the lying.
You just back me up.
What are you up to?
You've to beat them
at their own game.
You don't want betel leaf
if I prepare it?
You won't have it?
- No.
What is it, Braju?
A letter for you.
I was listening to your song.
Manda,
The Lotus is publishing my essay!
Really?
- Look at this letter!
Didn't I tell you?
Sister-in-law.
Sister-in-law. Sister-in-law.
The Lotus accepted my essay.
Stop that banging. I am busy.
Cousin, The Lotus accepted my essay.
Light of the Moonless Night?
- No. Dark of the Sun.
Good.
Stop that banging, I said!
Charu.
Just a moment.
What's going on?
What's the matter?
A cockroach. If it gets away...
A cockroach?
Where did it go?
Maybe under the bed.
Oh. In that case...
Big news An election in England.
We are all very excited.
The party in power now,
the Tories...
will never do India any good.
So we all want the other party...
The Liberals, to win.
Bipin says he'll offer a prayer for
them at the Kalighat temple.
Here, take these keys.
Smell this. Hot off the press.
Tell me, who will win?
Dizzy or Gladstone?
What do you say?
Gladstone. Liberals.
I bet Nishikanta 50 rupees.
Good. Liberals. Gladstone.
Charu.
Want ice-cream?
Have some.
- No.
Manda, ice-cream?
There's one extra.
- No.
Why not?
- Makes my teeth ache.
Hey, cat...
ice-cream?
Look.
Charu...
if I write something good but
it stays in your notebook...
nobody will ever see it,
and it'll never be printed.
Doesn't that seem wrong?
Of course.
You were wrong about my work.
I write very well, don't I?
Of course.
It's quite an honor for
a new writer, isn't it?
Of course.
Then from now on show me a bit
more respect, all right?
You are going out?
I want to go show my friends.
THE PHILANTHHOPE.
The Cuckoo's Call.
The Cuckoo's Lament.
My Village.
What?
Look!
You wrote this?
In The Philanthrope?
Too much lime in Amol's betel
leaf burns his mouth.
I will prepare it from now on.
Sister-in-law.
You...
What are you doing?
What has come over you?
Don't you realize how
well you write?
When I told you to write
about your village...
I never imagined you
could write so well.
Believe me...
I am really quite amazed.
So natural.
So flowing!
You mustn't stop.
You must keep writing.
Otherwise, all your talent...
No,
I'll never write anything again.
Never.
Never again.
Why are you crying?
Don't cry.
You are right.
How silly of me!
I got your shirt wet.
To the Liberals!
Bhupati won his bet.
And we are celebrating
with his winnings.
I lost the bet...
but the money was originally mine.
So who is the actual host?
Bhupati Dutta or Nishikanta
Chowdhury?
And why should it be you?
It was your father's
money originally!
Order, order!
Bhupati,
the musicians and singer are ready.
What's the point of all
this useless talk?
Absolutely right.
There's no point at all.
We will certainly have our music.
But first...
I want to say something.
We are celebrating today because
the Liberals won.
And given the political situation
in India today...
It's our duty to do so.
In my opinion...
there's one person we should
especially remember today.
This celebration, The Sentinel...
and our political consciousness...
are all due to one person.
Raja Rammohan Roy.
That's right.
If not for him,
we wouldn't have cared...
whether the parliamentary
elections had been won...
by the Tories or the Liberals.
That's why I think...
that our first and foremost liberal
of the 19th century...
should be remembered today.
And now Joydeb will sing a
song he composed himself.
I second Bhupati's proposal
with all my heart.
But I too wish to say something.
After this first song...
suppose we get a bit more liberal...
and listen to a Zappa by Nidhu Babu.
We will ask our friend
Shashanka to sing it.
Why me?
Go on now, Joydeb.
What are you thinking about?
Hey, Mr. Know-it-All.
About England?
Why did our great Raja
Rammohan Roy...
have to die in a foreign land?
In far-off Bristol.
How many Bengalis will
ever see his grave?
You will.
Will I ever go there?
You will go.
First to Bardhaman, then to Britain.
Right?
Well?
First Bardhaman...
then betrothal...
and then Britain.
And then?
Then Bristol.
And then a barrister.
And then?
And then...
back to Bengal.
Black native,
bolting from the British.
What do you think?
Bengal? Nothing better?
And Bankim.
Babu Bankim Chandra.
Byron to Bankim.
Bishabriksha.
But what about me?
O being celestial,
you who dwell in my house...
in the form of a witch.
Am I so bad?
So beastly? So brazen.
I bow before you...
Here.
Why didn't you sing today?
You should have.
You have such a nice voice.
Charu?
We are leaving tomorrow.
- For where?
Manda received word that
her father's very ill.
The money I borrowed.
Does my cousin know you are leaving?
Yes, I told him.
Besides,
I'll be back in a few days.
Give him a hand, will you?
It's an early train tomorrow,
and we must pack.
So good night.
Manda.
Send me the magazine
with your article.
Manda.
If nothing else,
I can read your name.
This will make things
hard for my cousin.
Why?
You are here.
What am I to manage the paper now?
That's right.
Sit down. You are a captive.
You'll stay as long as the
paper's in operation.
Before this gathering breaks up...
I have a proposal.
No, a complaint...
directed at the editor...
and owner of The Sentinel.
In other words, our host tonight...
Mr. Bhupati Dutta.
Our distinguished editor
is acting...
as if he doesn't know what
I'm talking about.
May I first inquire...
as to whether you're acquainted
with this magazine.
Or perhaps even read it?
No.
You mean to say you haven't read...
the contribution on page 22...
of the current issue?
- No.
Would you swear to that?
- Yes.
Come straight out with it!
You sly devil!
Your wife's writing for
The Philanthrope...
and you keep it a secret?
I haven't seen it.
- Let me see.
What does this say?
Mrs. Charulata Dasi!
This is Charu's writing?
- That's right.
Girish Ghosh had better watch out.
Bhupati rivals him as an actor.
This must be old.
Sure! Prehistoric, right?
Is that so?
Congratulations.
- Hip, hip, hurray!
Hip, hip, hurray!
Hmm! Just sign here.
Good.
We will deliver your order
Wednesday morning.
Fine. Good day.
Yes?
What can I do for you?
What's the meaning of this letter?
That's from us.
- I know.
Something wrong with the English?
You know very well what I mean.
We owed you 2,700 rupees for paper.
My manager paid you for
this in February...
Three months ago.
So why this letter from your lawyer?
So your manager says
he paid that bill?
Of course.
All 2,700?
- There must be some mistake.
Where's your manager?
- Away at the moment.
Cleared out, has he?
Tell me whatever you've
to say to him.
What's there to say?
Doesn't he know how much he paid?
Oh, here it's.
Look here. 300 rupees paid.
And only after three reminders.
See for yourself.
What?
Here are copies of the letters.
See for yourself.
It's all perfectly clear.
We don't send out legal notices
without good reason.
What would we gain by
losing our customers?
We are only here thanks to them.
But we are running a business.
We've to keep that in mind too,
don't we?
I mean, contact is important...
Very well. I'll look into this.
But business is business.
Sir!
You forgot your...
By the end of the month, all right?
He could get 100 rupees
just for that cane.
These people!
Amol?
My cousin's never this late.
Isn't he coming up?
I will go see.
Amol.
Whatever happens...
promise me you won't go away.
What could happen?
- Promise me.
What are you afraid of?
Give me your word you won't leave.
Promise me.
My cousin's back.
Let me go see what happened.
Give me your word...
You won't leave!
Promise!
Let me go.
Let go of me.
Brother?
Have you ever seen the play
dead soldiers on stage?
There's one.
They get up again when the
curtain comes down.
But this one won't get up.
My favorite smell.
The smell of printing ink.
Let's go.
Someone so close to me!
My own relative.
No, more than that...
A friend.
To think such a man would betray me,
Amol.
It's not just the payments
he never made.
He even took out loans in my name.
I can't even tell you how
he exploited my goodwill.
And I put all my trust in me.
When it first dawned on me,
I was so stunned...
that my head reeled.
I told Abdul to drive
along the Ganges.
I felt like I was suffocating.
It's not the money that upsets me.
I will pay whatever's owed.
But...
if this is how one man
treats another...
If a man I put such trust in shows
not the slightest respect...
then what have we got?
How do we go on living?
Trust, faith.
Are these just empty words?
Is there no honesty?
Is it all just sham and lies?
Can you not even trust a man
who's so close to you?
How can people live
and work together?
It's been a terrible blow, Amol.
It feels like my whole
world is crumbling.
What can I do to help?
You don't have to do anything,
my friend.
Just stay as you are, that's all.
I've told you so much.
I can't tell Charu everything.
Have you had dinner?
- Yes.
Tell you what: Let's all go to
the seashore for a few days.
I mean it. Think it over.
You know?
Yes.
Charu,
you wrote such a nice piece...
that got published in that magazine.
But you never showed me anything.
When Nishikanta announced it
in front of everyone...
I was quite embarrassed.
I felt very hurt.
When could I tell you?
You are always so busy.
I won't be busy anymore.
I've gotten rid of your rival,
you understand?
Now I can give you all
the time in the world.
Dear Cousin...
I believe I'd only be a further
burden to you...
If I stayed here under the
present circumstances.
I've learned of some
work out of town...
and I am going to see about it.
Best wishes to both of you.
Amol.
P.S.: Charu mustn't give
up her writing.
Did you see this?
What is it?
- He is gone!
Who?
- Your brother-in-law.
Packed his things last
night and cleared out!
He left a letter.
I don't want to be a burden.
As if he could ever be a burden!
What are you saying?
- It's the truth.
Where are you going?
His room's empty.
He had some of my proof sheets...
and I came to get them...
but he'd vanished!
You are right. He is gone.
How strange!
Braju!
Braju! Braju!
Are you deaf?
- I did answer, ma'am.
Put away his bedding.
- Whose bedding?
Amol's! Whose do you think?
These old servants!
Charu, you are angry.
And I know you have reason to be.
But just consider one thing.
How responsible and
mature he's become.
He left out of concern for me...
Yet like a child he forgot
to say where he was going!
Silly boy!
I know perfectly well
where he's gone.
To Bardhaman.
Just make some inquiries.
Bardhaman?
That's a good one!
Charu.
Yes?
No.
I can't say these things properly.
Perhaps I should read some Bankim,
eh?
My first gray hair.
Charu...
won't you write some more?
You know why I like your
writing so much?
Why?
Because I understand it all.
I don't understand
what others write.
Keep writing, Charu.
I will.
Start your newspaper again
and I'll write.
You'll write for my newspaper?
Politics?
Why must it be politics?
- What else?
Can't a paper cover
more than politics?
Have politics in English and
all the rest in Bengali.
You take care of the one,
and I'll handle the other.
What?
- Aren't I right?
That's a wonderful suggestion!
Brilliant!
I never thought of it.
- Can you manage?
If I can't manage alone,
Nishikanta can help.
Two people can do it.
- Three.
Yes.
- The three of us.
Hurray!
Listen.
Let's not waste any more time here.
They talk about the
roar of the waves.
Yes. Nothing like the sound
of a printing press.
Let's go.
- Where?
Come on.
Come.
I should've written Nishikanta
to come to the station.
Then we could've discussed
our new plan.
Put those down here, Braju.
It's easier to unpack.
Where's my bag of shells?
Would you like some tea?
Or some cool sherbet?
Now?
- You don't want anything?
I'd rather go see Nishikanta
right away.
This minute?
- I won't be long.
Now's best, before he gets
started on something else.
Moti Maa!
Have Braju bring up a copy
of The Englishman.
I haven't seen a paper in days.
I wonder what's been going on.
It's so hot!
Moti Maa!
- Coming.
Bring some water. I'd like a bath.
Charu.
Did you call?
Amol is in Madras,
staying with a friend.
Read it. It's good news.
Take it.
I will be back.
Amol, why did you go away?
Amol!
Why did you leave without a word?
Why didn't you tell me?
Amol!
I've brought your water, madam.
All right.
Dearest sister-in-law.
I am in Madras, at a friend's house.
I am fine, but for a few days now...
the strains of the instrument
have been ringing in my ears.
You may write to them in
Bardhaman if you wish.
Are you still trying to revive
the dead soldier?
My salutations to both of you.
Yours, Amol.
Braju?
- Yes?
Light the lamps.
Come in.